Hi, in this video we're going to extend
our understanding of SQL by talking about
how we can use operators to
create more complex conditions or
data values in our queries.
Operators are words or symbols that we
use in our code to define some sort of
condition among data elements.
Most of these are probably
familiar to you in concept but
here we'll talk about how
to use them in our SQL.
Specifically we'll talk about
three types of operators,
comparison operators, arithmetic
operators, and logical operators.
Here's a summary of the operators
we'll cover in each category.
If you're just listening, don't worry
we'll list each of them as we go forward.
The first type of operators we'll
talk about are comparison operators.
Comparison operators help to find whether
a condition between two fields or
functions of fields is true or false.
Here are the comparison
operators available in SQL.
This shall look pretty familiar.
We have equal to, less than,
greater than, less than or equal to, and
greater than or equal to.
We also have the equivalent operators
less than or greater than and
not equal to where not is
represented by an exclamation point.
Similarly, we have not greater than and
not less than also using
the exclamation point.
We touched on this with some of our
related videos where we talked about
where and having statement.
In fact that's primarily where these type
of operators are used, to establish some
criteria by which rows or aggregate
rows are filtered from a data set.
To use comparison operators we place
them between two fields, functions and
fields or fixed values.
Here's a couple of examples using
where and having statements.
Here, we have a where clause,
which is true when field A is less than or
equal to field B.
And a having clause, which is true when
the sum of field C is not equal to 100.
The second type of operators
are arithmetic operators,
namely plus for addition,
minus for subtraction, star for
multiplication and
forward slash for division.
Most SQL engines also support the modulus
operator, represented as a percent sign
which returns the remainder of one
value divided by another value.
We can use arithmetic operators
in a couple of different ways.
We can use them in conjunction with
comparison operators in where and
having statements to construct more
complex conditions like these.
Again, we have a where clause which
is true when FIELD_A + FIELD_B
is equal to FIELD_C.
And the having clause which is true
when sum of FIELD_D minus 100 is greater
than the sum of FIELD_E divided by 2.
Note that I can use arithmetic
operations on either side or
both sides of the comparison operator.
Note also that the calculations are done
in normal arithmetic order with division
and multiplication operations taking
precedence over addition and subtraction.
For more complex operations I can
use parentheses just like I would
in common math equations to achieve
the right order of operations like this.
Here I use parenthesis to ensure that
the addition operation happens before
the division operation.
The other place I can use arithmetic
operations is in my select statement.
I can create calculation
within rows of a data set
to construct new columns based on
other columns on that row like these.
Here, I add FIELD_A to FIELD_B in each row
and put it in a new field called FIELD_N.
Be careful not to confuse this type of
operation with aggregation functions like
the sum function, which are designed
to aggregate data across rows
when a group by command is used.
Simple arithmetic operators worked
within one row of data across columns.
However, I can use arithmetic operations
with aggregation functions as well
like this.
A select statement is an aggregation
intended to be used by the group by
statement.
Here fields C and D are first aggregated
using the sum function and then
those sums are added together to produce
field N in the aggregated output data set.
The third type of operators we'll
cover are logical operator.
There are actually quite a few
logical operators available in SQL
including some that are unique
to specific SQL engines.
Just about all of them are primarily
used in where or having clauses as
we are trying to define specific
conditions for row or aggregate faltering.
Here we will discuss a few of
the most common logical operators
that you're likely to use in
day-to-day query writing.
We'll start with two familiar logical
operators called Boolean operators,
and and or.
We generally use these
operators in a where or
have in clause where we want to include
more than one condition in the clause.
When we use and,
it means that all conditions in
our statement need to be true.
When we use or, it means that at least
one of the conditions in our statement
needs to be true.
I can represent the situation
visual when using a Venn diagram.
In the diagram, the shaded portion
represents the condition under which some
overall statement is true.
In SQL code,
it might look something like this.
In the where clause,
the overall statement is true only
when both conditions are true.
Field A is less than 10 and
field B is greater than 100.
And the having clause,
the overall statement is true when
either of the conditions are true.
The sum of field C is equal to 50 or
the minimum of field D is greater or
equal to 5.
Like arithmetic operators,
I can construct much more complex
conditions using a combination of and
operators, or operators and parenthetical
expressions to achieve the outcome I want.
Again, a little creativity can
go a long way in writing SQL.
The next logical operator we'll
discuss is the in operator.
The in operator allows us to set up
a condition to determine whether a field
value or a expression is contained within
a specific list of possible values.
You can think of the in operator as
short hand for a long list of or
conditions I might include in a where or
having clause.
For example, I could write this,
where FIELD_A equals AAA or
FIELD_A equals BBB or FIELD_A equals CCC.
Or I could write this where
FIELD_A in AAA, BBB, CCC.
As the list of possible values gets large,
using the in operator makes
my code a lot simpler.
It's also useful when my list of possible
values is defined by a sub-query.
We discuss this case in a separate video.
Another time saving operator
is the between operator,
which allows us to set up
a condition where a field or
expression is between two other values or
expressions.
Again, this is really just a shorthand for
a compound condition using comparison
operators and the and operator.
For example, I could write this,
WHERE FIELD_A is greater than or
equal to 10 and
FIELD_A is less than or equal to 100.
Or I could write this,
WHERE FIELD_A between 10 and 100.
The like operator is a powerful
operator that has a lot of flexibility.
But its syntax is also
a bit more involved.
The like operator basically searches for a
specific set of characters in a string or
text field and
returns a true result if there is a match.
The tricky part about using like is that
I usually need to incorporate one or
more wild card characters that
indicate where in the string I
expect the pattern to occur.
The two most common wild card
characters we use are the following.
The percent symbol means any
string of zero or more characters.
The underscore character
means any single character.
It's probably easiest to illustrate
how they work with a few examples.
This condition will be true for
any string that starts with abc,
regardless of how long that string is.
This condition will only be true
if the string starts with abc and
is four characters long.
This condition will be
true if the sub-string
abc appears anywhere in the string.
You get the idea.
This last case is probably those common
when where using the like operator.
But there are a number of
different ways I can use wildcards
including some that we won't cover here,
to get the desired result.
One special condition will add to our
discussion of logical operators is
the IS NULL condition.
This is a special condition that is true
when a field or expression is a null
which you may recall is a special database
value that indicates the absence of data.
The syntax is pretty simple.
For example, I use IS NULL in a WHERE
clause like this, WHERE FIELD_A IS NULL.
In analytics we use this
condition quite a bit to look for
whole scenario of data where the field
route row do not have the data we need.
The last logical operator we will
talk about is the NOT operator.
NOT basically reverses the logical
meaning of other logical operators.
Technically, I can use it
with pretty any operator.
But there are only a few cases
where it really makes sense.
The fist is in conjunction with the AND
operator.
Remember our AND and OR in Venn diagrams?
Well, there's a third case of
the diagram you might be interested in,
namely this one.
The shaded part of the diagram represents
the case where one condition is true or
the other condition is true,
but not both conditions.
Here's an example of a query
that uses NOT with an and
operator, to achieve
this type of situation.
So here we're looking for any case except
those where FIELD_A is less that ten and
FIELD_B is greater than 100.
The other common cases where we use
the NOT operator is with the LIKE and
IS NULL operators.
These cases are a little
more straight forward so
we'll just illustrate it
using a couple of examples.
This condition is true whenever FIELD_A
does not contain the sub string abc.
Similarly, this condition is true when
the value of FIELD_A is anything except
a database null.
So we've covered quite
a lot up to this point.
Again there are number of logical
operators that are available in SQL but
the ones we've covered
are by far the most common.
Let's quickly recap, we covered three
types of operators that can expand
the usefulness of our SQL queries.
We introduced comparison operators
which helped determine whether our
condition between two fields
are expressions of true or false.
We then talked about arithmetic operators
which we can use a comparative expressions
or to transform values and
select statements.
Finally, we presented a set
of common logical operators
which helped us represent a variety of
different conditions and or where or
having statements.
Hopefully you've got an appreciation for
how much power these operators
add to our SQL queries and
how they give us the flexibility to
create some pretty complex condition.
With the goal of the given exactly
the day we need for our analysis.